hi i'm isaac and i'm going to show you
another way of measuring the length of
an arc and in doing so we will stumble
across this incredible result
involving prime numbers rounding and pi
the product of the odd primes divided by
their nearest multiples of four
is pi over four it's amazing right i
mean
why is pi here pi relates to circles so
where's the hidden circle
why do primes come out to it why does
rounding result in this
perfectly exact result there will of
course be some fairly intense maths
along the way so if that's your thing
you're in for a treat if not i'll be
explaining everything step by step to
make it as easy as possible to follow
to begin we'll start with some hopefully
familiar results that will be key to the
main proof
this formula is often the first
introduction into the idea of adding an
infinite number of things
but getting a finite answer to see how
this could possibly happen
imagine taking a piece of paper and
cutting it in half now take one of those
halves and cut that in half
and now do the same with the quarter to
get 2 8 and repeat forever
in the end you will have taken one piece
of paper and split it into
half a piece of paper then a quarter of
a piece of paper and an eighth of a
piece of paper and so on
because we know what we started with one
whole piece we must have that one
equals a half plus a quarter plus an
eighth and so on
this equation is actually a specific
case of what's called an
infinite geometric series which is sums
of the form
1 plus x plus x squared plus x cubed and
so on
where x is the common ratio between
successive terms
dividing a term by the one directly
before it will always give you x
all infinite geometric series converge
to a finite answer
whenever x is between -1 and 1.
the first step to finding a formula for
what that finite answer is
is to let the series be equal to some
unknown value let's call it t
now if we multiply both sides by x then
on the right hand side we get x t
and on the left hand side every term in
the sum is multiplied by x to get x
plus x squared plus x cubed etc
now if we add one to both sides then we
get x t plus one on the right
and on the left we say we started off
with which was equal to t
now if we rearrange it we get t minus x
t is one
so t is one over one minus x
therefore one plus x plus x squared and
so on and so on
is one over one minus x and this is the
first formula we'll need to remember
and use later the second important
result we need to know
is an approximation for 1 to the k plus
2 to the k
plus 3 to the k and so on and so on up
to enter the k
as n gets larger and larger towards
infinity
to do this we actually need to look at
this seemingly irrelevant expression
x minus one to the k plus one don't
worry it will of course become relevant
very soon
now what does this expression really
mean well
it's x minus one multiplied by itself k
plus one times
x minus one to the k plus one is x minus
one times x minus one times x minus one
and so on and so on down to x minus one
and what we're going to do is expand all
of these brackets
fortunately as we only need an
approximation for this it turns out we
only need the first two terms
which are the two highest powers of x so
let's start by looking at how many x are
the k
plus one terms there are and hopefully
you can see
that to get x to the k plus one you need
to take the left hand
x from all k plus one brackets there's
only one way to do that
so x minus one to the k plus one is x to
the k
plus one plus some other things now
let's work out the h to the k term
we need to take an x from all but one of
the brackets and the minus one from the
remaining bracket
since there are a total of k plus one
brackets we have k plus one choices from
where to take the minus one term
and so there are k plus one ways to
obtain the x to the k
term that is to take the minus one from
the first bracket
or the second bracket or the third and
so on up to the k plus one
bracket so the x to the k term is minus
one
times k plus one times x to the k
now i could continue and work out the x
to the k minus one term and all the
other terms down to the plus or minus
one at the end
and no doubt some of you will even know
a formula for this but it turns out we
don't need to know these terms in detail
we just need to know that all the rest
is some polynomial which is so small
they're absolutely dominated by the x to
the k minus one term
and a shorthand for writing this is big
o of x
to the k minus one this means those
terms are not being forgotten about
but it condensed into one term which is
of the order x to the k minus one
where the k minus one is the highest
power of x that appears
in all the remaining terms so now we
have
x minus one to the k plus one is x to
the k plus one
minus k plus one x to the k plus big o
of x to the k minus one
and by rearranging we get x to the k
plus one minus
x minus one to the k plus one is k plus
one x to the k
minus big o of x to the k minus one
we're now going to substitute in
different values of x into this equation
and see what happens specifically we're
going to use
x equals n x equals n minus one x equals
n minus two
all the way down to x equals one looking
at the
order terms those with big o notation we
see that they are
all dominated by the first n to the k
minus one term
since this will always be the largest
value as then gets larger and larger as
it tends to infinity
we can in fact just write all of them as
big o of n to the k minus one
of course some of them will be much
smaller than n to the k minus one
but none of them will be more than of
the order n to the k minus one
and so the expression remains valid
now look what happens when we add all of
these equations together
on the left side almost all of the terms
will cancel
to give us just n to the k plus one and
on the right side we can factor out the
k plus 1 term
to get k plus 1 times 1 to the k plus 2
to the k plus 3 to the k and so on up to
n to the k
minus n times big o of n to the k minus
1.
remembering our shorthand for the terms
we didn't calculate was that they were
all
at most n to the k minus one so if we
have n of them
then the terms we haven't written out
yet will be at most
some expression of order n to the k
this means we can write n to the k plus
1 is k plus 1 times
1 to the k plus 2 to the k plus 3 to the
k and so on and so on to n to the k
minus big o of n to the k
and now by rearranging we can get n to
the k plus one
plus big o of n to the k is k plus one
times one to the k
plus two to the k and so on and so on up
to n to the k
now dividing by k plus one we can get
n to the k plus one over k plus one plus
big o of n to the k over k
plus 1 is 1 to the k plus 2 to the k and
so on and so on up to n to the k
now an expression of any order
multiplied by a constant
doesn't change its order so we can drop
one of the one over k
plus ones on the left hand side leaving
us with
n to the k plus one over k plus one plus
big o
of n to the k is one to the k plus two
to the k and so on and so on up to enter
the k
and this is our approximation to that
sum we were looking for at the start
however to get it in a form that's more
useful later on
we actually need to divide by n to the k
plus one first
to get one over k plus one plus big o of
one over n
is 1 to the k plus 2 to the k and so on
and so on up to n to the k
all divided by n to the k plus 1.
so in summary what we've shown there is
that
as n goes to infinity 1 to the k plus 2
to the k
plus 3 to the k and so on and so on to
enter the k all divided by n to the k
plus 1
goes to 1 over k plus 1. this is the
second
mini result along our journey towards
the overall proof
now on to pi and circles we start with a
right angle isosceles triangle
and to keep it simple let's have the two
sides of the same length be of distance
one
now since we need to get pi out of this
somehow let's put in an arc
centered at a vertex with a radius of
one so that it goes between the sides of
the triangle
like this now what we want to look at is
the length of this arc
the circumference of a full circle is of
course two pi times the radius
in our case the radius is one and as
this is an eighth of a circle
the length of the arc is pi over four
the next thing to do is to split up the
side of the triangle that is
tangent to the arc in n equals sections
in this case we set n equal to 3 and
draw lines
from the end point of the sections to
the center of the arc
next we take each of the points where
these lines meet the arc
and draw lines from them to the line
above them meeting that line at 90
degrees
now those lines give a fairly good
approximation to the arc
and this approximation will get better
if we create smaller and smaller
sections by increasing n the number of
sections we create
there's nothing special about me using n
equals 3 here this is just to illustrate
how the process works
in practice n will be much much larger
to get a better approximation
so what we want to do is to find the
length of each of the lines
that approximate the arc and add them
together to get an approximation to the
length of the arc which is pi over four
for now let's look at just one of these
lines
and let's call it the eighth one
corresponding to the ith section from
the bottom
in our case we're using i is 2. and to
avoid getting losses to which vertices
we're talking about
let's start naming them first let's call
the
vertices of the original triangle a b
and c as shown
now let's say the endpoints of the
section we're analyzing are x and y
and finally let's say that the line that
forms part of the estimation of the arc
length has endpoints l
and m as it turns out to make this
problem easier we want to use a new
point
z so that l m and x z are parallel
and go between the same lines okay
on to finding something from our
construction first
let's look at the triangles a l m and a
x z
and notice that they are similar this
means we can say that the ratios of
corresponding lengths are equal
and so l m over a l is x z
over a x now there's another similar
triangle here
but it isn't quite as obvious if you
look at triangle x
z y you'll notice that it has one right
angle at z
one of its other angles is at y and the
last angle the one at x will be 90 minus
the angle at
y but now if you look at triangle a
b y you will again find a right angle at
b
and the same angle at y and therefore
the last angle at a
must be the same as the one at x from
the previous triangle
so we can see that triangles a b y and x
z y are similar and so we can like
before
see the ratios of corresponding lengths
are equal giving
x z over x y is a b over a y
finally the last thing we're going to
use is the fact that for large n
the number of sections we split bc into
ax
is approximately a y and as then gets
larger and larger they get closer and
closer
let's start off with our first
observation that l m over a l is x z
over ax
if we multiply the right hand side by
one hopefully you'll agree we haven't
changed it
we can replace that one with x y over x
y
and we can reorder the numerators on the
right so instead of having
x z x y we now have x y x z
now using our second observation that x
z over x
y is a b over a y we get l
m over a l is x y over a x times
a b over a y and now we can merge these
two fractions together
by multiplying the numerators and the
denominators
we can now use our third observation
that for large n
a x is approximately a y so we can
replace
ax with a y and our equal sign with an
approximately equal sign
now how can we find a y squared in terms
of lengths we know
well we can use pythagoras on triangle a
b y to get a y squared is
a b squared plus b y squared
this is now our final formula for l m
over a
l which we know provides a better and
better approximation as the value of n
increases
n remember is the number of sections
we've divided the arc up into
and i represents the particular segment
we're interested in
it's worth noticing at this point that
since al is the radius of the arc
its length is one we can either put
actual values into this formula
for n and i to find an approximation for
the length of the line
or even better just use n and i to get a
general formula
for the line for any end and i as we
have here
taking stock so far we have an
approximation for the length of each
line
used to approximate the length of the
arc
and if we add all these lengths together
we get an approximation for the length
of the arc
which we know to be pi over four as
we've noted before
this approximation will get better and
better the larger n it gets
as an example for three sections we get
an approximation that is about 0.1 away
from pi over 4 which is about
0.785 for 50 sections the approximation
is 0.005 away from pi over 4.
so if in some sense we could let n 10 to
infinity
this approximation would actually be
inequality
geometrically this means we would be
adding an
infinite number of terms each of which
are infinitesimally small
or basically zero but of course we can't
say that infinity times zero is pi over
four
because that's nonsense we have to be
much cleverer
the way out of this problem is to
manipulate our formula for the
approximation of the length of the arc
into something where if we were to take
n to infinity we can make some sense of
it
to do this we first write the sum
vertically
notice that all the terms have a
numerator of 1 over n
so we'll take out a factor of 1 over n
from every term to simplify things a
little
now remember our first mini result way
back at the start of the video
that gave this equation for an infinite
geometric series
look what happens if we swap the left
and right hand sides of the equation
and substitute x for minus 1 over n
squared
this is now our first term so we can
replace that term with an equivalent
infinite series
we can also do the same for the second
term by replacing
x with minus two over n squared
in fact and some of you may have spotted
this we can replace every term with a
corresponding infinite series
to create a sort of grid addition of
n rows and infinite columns and it's
worth reminding ourselves that
all this sums to become our
approximation for pi over four
at this point we might be tempted to try
and sum all the terms one row at a time
but instead we're actually going to sum
each column individually
the reason being this gives us these
terms which is starting to look like a
really coherent formula
now let's put that 1 over n we took out
back into each term
hopefully this is starting to look
vaguely familiar
remember our second mini result as n
gets larger and larger the left hand
side gets closer and closer to the right
hand side
but hang on each of the terms in our
formula for pi over 4
is the left hand side of the second
linear result for different values of k
when k is 0 we get the first term when k
is 2
we get the second term when k is 4 we
get the third term
and so on so now we can let n go to
infinity and suddenly it all makes sense
our first term becomes one over zero
plus one the second term becomes one
over two plus one the third term is one
over four plus one and so on giving us
this infinite series with pi over four
so now we have something which is on its
own a very nice result
pi over four is one minus a third plus a
fifth minus a seventh
and so on it's also probably quite
unexpected
especially if you haven't seen this
before it's actually quite a famous
result which was discovered by the
indian mathematician madhava
in the 14th century and then
rediscovered by leibniz around 300 years
later in europe
so naturally it's been referred to as
the leibniz zero supply
ever since its rediscovery however as
nice as this series is
it doesn't yet look close to the result
we were aiming for
which in case you've forgotten is this
the question is
where do the primes come into all of
this and why are we adding instead of
multiplying
and what about rounding i promise we're
nearly there
there's only a couple more steps to help
with the manipulations we're going to
label our series of pi over 4 as
m so we have m is one
minus a third plus a fifth minus a
seventh plus a ninth and so on
if we take a closer look at the negative
terms we can see
they are all the terms that have a
denominator that is one less than a
multiple of four
and similarly the positive terms are all
the terms of the denominator
one more than a multiple of four this
might
hint at the fact we're going to start
rounding to the nearest multiples of
four
but we'll come to that soon enough it's
just worth noting now
to help us see where we're heading
if we skip over the boring one term the
second term is a third
we can try to eliminate that second term
by considering what a third of
m is well if we divide each term by
three we get a third of m is a third
minus a ninth plus a fifteenth and so on
but hang on each of those terms on the
right hand side
appears in the original series m but
with the opposite sign
so if we add m to a third of m
all of these terms will cancel out m
plus a third of m
is one plus a fifth minus the seventh
minus an eleventh plus a thirteenth
and so on which is just the original
series but without
any terms that are one over a multiple
of three
factoring out m this gives m times
one plus a third is one plus a fifth
minus the seventh and so on so what
we've actually done in this step
is multiply our original series by one
plus a third
to eliminate all terms which are one
over a multiple of three
we can try the same approach for the new
second term
which is a fifth a fifth of m
times one plus a third is a fifth plus
the 25th
minus the thirty-fifth minus fifty-fifth
and again each of these terms appear in
the above series the
m times one plus a third one but this
time with the same sign
so to eliminate these terms we have to
subtract
so now we see that m times one plus a
third
times one minus a fifth is one minus a
seventh minus an eleventh
plus a thirteenth plus the seventeenth
and so on
if we did this another time with the new
second term
a seventh we would multiply by one plus
a seventh
and this would eliminate all remaining
terms which are one over a multiple of
seven
every time we repeat this process we
lose all of the terms that are one over
a multiple of the denominator of the
second term
so next we do it with 11 where we add
then 13 subtract then 17 subtract and so
on eliminating all related terms as we
go
looking at the sequence of numbers we've
eliminated as the second term so far
a third a fifth or seventh and eleventh
thirteenth or seventeenth
we can now see these are the primes
we've been looking for all along
having worked through the first few
examples hopefully it isn't too hard to
convince yourself
the second term in the series at any
elimination step is one over the next
smallest
prime this is because any number less
than that prime has already been
eliminated from the series by a smaller
prime
earlier in the elimination process so
now we know
that to eliminate all terms of the form
one over a multiple of prime
p we multiply our series by one plus or
minus one over p
but hang on how do we know whether we're
adding or subtracting
well fortunately there's a very easy way
to tell if the one over p
term is a minus in the original series m
then to eliminate the p related terms we
multiply the series by one
plus one over p and similarly if the one
over p
term is a plus in the original series
then to eliminate p
related terms we multiply the series by
one minus one over p
now as highlighted before we can tell if
any tone in the original series
m is a plus or a minus just by seeing
whether it is one more
or one less than a multiple of four for
example we subtracted seven and eleven
both one less than a multiple of four
but added 13 and 17
as these are both one more than a
multiple of four
continuing in this way we can now
eliminate all the terms related to all
primes
and in fact by doing so we will
eliminate all of the terms
except one now the result we're aiming
for
has pi over four on its own on the left
hand side
and this infinite product we've achieved
so far doesn't
however if you remember m is pi over
four
so we need to eliminate all the other
terms on the left
to make this easier let's turn each term
on the left into a single fraction by
adding or subtracting the given fraction
from one now let's cancel out each term
on the left one at a time
first by multiplying both sides by three
quarters
next we multiply both sides by five
then seven eighths continuing in this
way
as if by magic our miraculous formula
begins to appear
now you can see that the denominator of
each term on the right
is the prime number in the numerator
plus one if that prime is one
less than a multiple of four or it's the
prime in the numerator
minus one if that prime is one more than
a multiple of four
which is a very fancy way of saying that
the denominator
is the prime numerator rounded to the
nearest multiple of four
amazing and that's it it's all come
together now and we've finally shown
that pi over four is the product of all
odd primes
divided by themselves rounded to the
nearest multiple of four
thank you everyone for watching i'm
isaac and thanks to tom for hosting me
as an intern
see you all soon
you